National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 
Ministry of National Development Planning/ 
National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

NATIONAL 
ADAPTATION 
PLAN 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY


NATIONAL 
ADAPTATION 
PLAN 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 
Ministry of National Development Planning/
National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 1

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
Why Indonesia needs to adapt   3
Climate Projections, Hazards, and Impacts: Climate Change on Development    5 
What We Have? RAN API: Approach in Development Planning   12
Adaptation Targets   3
Action Plans    17
Coordination and Resource Mobilization Mechanism   26
Final Notes   28


2 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Indonesia is one of the countries located right on the equator, and is 
the largest archipelagic country in the world, making it very vulnerable 
to the effects of climate change. Based on climate change projection, 
Indonesia is experiencing an increase of temperature, including sea 
surface temperature, and changes in the pattern and intensity of rainfall. 
Changes in climate conditions will potentially cause various hazards 
including prolonged drought, flooding, and increasing extreme weather 
events that will have social, economic and environmental impacts, 
such as crops failures, reduced capture fisheries production, reduced 
livelihoods opportunity, loss of biodiversity, increase in number of 
outbreak events for various types of infectious diseases. The impact 
of climate change can ultimately hamper the implementation of the 
national development plan.
Adaptation action strategies in the development of climate resilience on 
short, medium and long term are needed to protect the community and 
development sustainability, especially for preventing massive socio-
economic losses in the future. To anticipate the potential negative 
impacts, the Indonesian Government is committed through the 
preparation of the National Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation 
(RAN API) or National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) as the main reference in 
the planning of climate change adaptation actions through the adoption 
of adaptive criteria.
This document is prepared through a scientific, inclusive and iterative 
process by taking into account the characteristics of sectors and regions 
through scientific studies that were strengthened with experience 
and best practice at the local level from various stakeholders. As it is 
known, adaptation is a collaborative effort from various stakeholders 
and cooperation between the national governments, sub-national 
governments, private sectors, development partners and communities. 
Through climate resilience development, it is expected to support the 
achievement of national development targets that are sustainable and 
adaptive to climate change.
Finally, I would like to thank to all those who have helped in the 
preparation of this document and can be helpful to the beneficiaries.
Jakarta, December 2019

Dr. Ir. H. Suharso Monoarfa 
Minister of National Development Planning/
Head of National Development Planning Agency 
(Bappenas)

Foreword


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 3

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Climate Change is a natural 
phenomenon that must be faced 
and anticipated wisely. Indonesian 
territory is located on the equator 
and also between two oceans, 
those geographic characteristics 
will affect the climate patterns. As 
an archipelagic country, most rivers 
in Indonesia are short river and 
potentially prone to flood or drought.
Extreme weather impacts on a 
series of disasters in Indonesia, 
such as drought followed by land 
and forest fires, flood also followed 
by landslides, sea level rise and 
extreme sea waves, no doubt they 
have direct impacts to the community. 
Loss of critical biodiversity is also 
a threat from climate change, one 
of them is coral bleaching due to 
rising of sea surface temperatures. 
In addition to the potential disaster 
event and environmental loss, most 

Climate is what 
we expect, 
weather is what 
we get.
- Mark Twain

of Indonesian will lose their 
livelihoods as a negative impact 
of climate change.
Besides, Indonesia’s economy 
is predicted to be threatened 
by climate change, as shown 
by the potential loss in GDP per 
capita. Therefore, appropriate 
and measurable policymaking is 
critically needed by considering 
various climate change scenarios 
and climate risks which might 
establish a resilience community 
and development to climate 
change. Compare to other 
countries in the world, Indonesia 
is a vulnerable country that has 
an extensive coastline, high 
population density in coastal 
areas, high dependence on the 
agricultural production and natural 
resource, relatively low in adaptive 
capacity, and tropical climate.

“

“

Disaster Event in Chart

Source: Disaster Information Data of Indonesia, BNPB (2019)

Flood

Tropical Cyclone/
Typhoon Drought

High tides/ 
Abrasion

Landslide

Why 
Indonesia 
needs to 
Adapt?


4 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

81.30 81.43 81.57 81.69 81.82

3.83 4.74 5.61 6.45 7.29

11.20 13.40 15.59 17.77 19.94

6.03 6.15 6.26 6.37 6.48

102.36 105.72 109.03 112.29 115.53

Potential Economic Losses
from Climate Change Impacts 
in Four Priority Sectors
(IDR Trillion)

Marine & Coastal

Water

Agriculture

Health

YEAR

SECTOR

TOTAL


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 5

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Climate Change on Development

Climate Projections, Hazards, and Impacts:

The global temperature record 
shows the increase of surface 
temperature. The rise of global 
average temperature is increasing 
the frequency of daily and seasonal 
extreme high temperatures, as 
well as decreasing in frequency 
of extreme low temperatures. The 
frequency and duration of heat wave 
events are also increasing certainly. 
The increase of global surface 
temperature is affected the global 
water cycle shown by changing 
rainfall during wet and dry season. 
The climate projection shows an 
increase of rainfall in equatorial 
regions, particularly on the Pacific 
Ocean. The long-term changes of 
climate parameters affect climate 
anomalies in shorter periods, such 
as El Niño-Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO), Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD), 
and monsoons.
Increasing temperature, changing 
rainfall patterns and intensity in 
Indonesia imply the environment 
condition. It is then affected the 
human activities. Moreover, plant 
metabolism, especially crops, is 
strongly influenced by temperature. 
The increase temperature in the 

central of agricultural commodities 
may reduce the productivity of 
crops, or it may even change the 
suitability as well as the cropping 
patterns. Changes in rainfall 
patterns and intensity also affect 
crops production, as the water 
requirement is different between 
crops and growth phases. Higher 
temperature and lower rainfall 
will dry out the soil and reduce 
the water availability, which then 
affected the water demand for 
settlements, households, and 
other economic activities.
Ocean warming dominates the 
increase of heat storage in the 
climate system. The increase in 
atmospheric temperature and sea 
surface temperature will affect 

the global ice coverage areas. 
The changes of ocean conditions 
will affect marine ecosystems and 
human activities. The increase 
of sea surface temperatures will 
amplify the risk of coral bleaching 
and it may decrease the fisheries 
production. Settlements located 
in coastal area are vulnerable 
to abrasion, coastal inundation, 
coastal flood, and high tides. Sea 
level rise also impact the increase of 
frequency and intensity of coastal 
inundation, tidal wave height, and 
coastal abrasion. Furthermore, the 
coastal community’s livelihood 
and activities are affected. It may 
potentially damage the infrastructure 
of public facility, agricultural land 
and aquaculture, markets, and other 
economic sectors.
Climate change does not respect 
border; it does not respect who you are 
– rich and poor, small and big. Therefore, 
this is what we call ‘global challenges’, 
which require global solidarity.
- Ban Ki-moon

“

“


6 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Changes of Monthly Average Sea Surface Temperature, Sea Surface Height, 
and Surface Salinity from 1961 to 2040

Source: BIG (Indonesian Geospatial Information Agency) 
in Ocean Climate Projection Assessment (Bappenas, 2018)

A significant increase in wave 
height might affected the potential 
of ship accidents and disturbance 
of sea transportation. Changes 
in atmospheric and oceanic 
conditions affect their interactions 
in climate system, including 
ENSO and IOD events, which also 
have impact on the Indonesian 
environment and waters. Extreme 
weather events such as tropical 
cyclone might also increase due 

to changes in atmospheric and 
ocean conditions, both its frequency 
and magnitude. Tropical cyclone 
which previously had insignificant 
impacts, begin to occur frequently 
approaching the equator area and 
trigger extreme weather events in 
Indonesia, namely extreme rainfall 
and storm.
The climate prediction indicates 
a significant decrease of rainfall 

during El Nino and intensify the 
possibility of drought for the 
next 5 years.

 

The related impacts to this 
issue in potential disaster area 
are forest fire, crop failures, and 
clean water shortage, as well as 
the other derivative impacts that 
may occur, such as air pollution, 
health and transportation safety, 
due to the haze pollution.

Projection of Daily Rainfall and Temperature Changes in Indonesia

Source: BMKG (Indonesian Meteorological, Climatological, and Geophysical Agency) 
in Atmospheric Climate Projection Assessment (Bappenas, 2018)


Increased 
Extreme Wave 
Height of

1.5
meter

Rainfall
2.5

mm/day

0.45OC-
0.75OC

Increased 
Temperature

Sea Level Rise 
from 0.8 to1.2cm/year

Flood

Climate hazards in each sector

Water availability Drought

Decrease of fisheries and 
agriculture commodity 
production 

Coastal flood affects 
the slope of the coastal 
environment 

Endanger marine 
safety 

Changes in 
sediment supply

Reduce the cruising range of 
small fishing boats <20GT

Development of vector 
diseases and heat stress in 
urban areas
National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 7

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)


8 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

EXTREME 
CLIMATE 
CONDITION

BOX 1

MARINE
Wave height projection until 2045 shows that 5.8 million km2 or 
approximately 90% of total area of Indonesia waters is dangerous 
for <10 GT vessel.
Some of the freeway shipping lane connected through sea toll 
determined by Ministry of Transportation will cross dangerous 
to extremely dangerous waters, especially on western part of 
Sumatera and northern part of Maluku.
Furthermore, the vessels of the National Shipping of Indonesia 
(PELNI) will be exposed to more than 3 m of wave height on 
western part of Sumatera.
COASTAL
Approximately 102,000 km of Indonesian coastline has various 
vulnerability level and 1,800 km of it is categorized as highly 
vulnerable coast. South Sulawesi Province is the longest coastline 
(573 km) with very high coastal vulnerability index (CVI 5).

Marine & Coastal Sector

Decreasing water availability has been projected to occur 
evenly in Java and Nusa Tenggara Island until 2045. In 
2024, the average of decreasing water availability in Java 
Island will reach 439.21 m3/capita/year and 1,654.82 m3/ 
capita/year in East Nusa Tenggara Province.

Water Sector

Rice production is projected to decrease 
more than 25% in Gorontalo Province, Maluku 
Province, and North Maluku Province until 2045.

Agriculture Sector

Projection of dengue fever event will be very high until 
2045 in these following cities: Pekanbaru, Palembang, 
Banjarbaru, Banjarmasin, Samarinda, Tarakan, 
Kolaka, Ambon, Semarang, Bali, and Kupang.

Health Sector


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 9

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)


10 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

NAD (Banda Aceh) 4 4 5 3 3
North Sumatra 3 3 4 3 4 (Medan City) 
Riau 3 3 4 3 5 (Pekanbaru City) 
Riau Islands 3 5 2 3 5 (Pekanbaru City) 
West Sumatra 2 5 4 2 4 (Padang City) 
Jambi 3 2 4 3 5 (Jambi City)
Bengkulu 2 5 3 2

4 (Bengkulu City) 
4 (Kepahiang City)
South Sumatra 3 3 4 4 5 (Palembang City) 
Lampung 3 5 3 3 2 (Bandar Lampung City) 
Bangka Belitung 3 5 4 3 -

Banten 4 5 3 3 1 (Pandeglang City) 
DKI Jakarta 4 3 5 1 -
West Java 4 5 3 3 -
Central Java 4 5 5 3 5 (Semarang City) 
DI Yogyakarta 4 5 4 3 3 (Yogyakarta City) 
East Java 4 5 3 3 2 (Malang City)

West Kalimantan 1 4 4 2 3 (Pontianak City) 
North Kalimantan 1 5 3 5 5 (Tarakan City) 
Central Kalimantan 1 4 4 4 5 (Palangkaraya City)
South Kalimantan 1 5 3 3

5 (Banjarbaru City) 
5 (Banjarmasin City)

East Kalimantan 1 5 3 3

2 (Balikpapan City) 
4 (Samarinda City)

SUMATRA KALIMANTAN

JAVA

Hazard 

IDnfeosgcrraipptihoicn Scale
Water Coastal Marine Agriculture Health

1 = very low 
2 = low
3 = moderate 
4 = high
5 = very high


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 11

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Gorontalo 1 5 2 5 2 (Gorontalo City) 
North Sulawesi 1 5 4 4 4 (Manado City) 
Central Sulawesi 1 3 4 4 -
West Sulawesi 1 4 4 3 -
Southeast Sulawesi 1 5 4 3 4 (Kolaka City) 
South Sulawesi 1 5 5 3 2 (Makassar City)

SULAWESI

Maluku 1 5 2 5 5 (Ambon City) 
Maluku Utara 4 5 4 5 -
Papua Barat 3 5 2 4 -
Papua 1 4 3 4 -

MALUKU & 
PAPUA

Bali 5 5 2 3 5 (Denpasar City)
West Nusa Tenggara 5 5 2 4 2 (Sumbawa Regency) 
East Nusa Tenggara 5 5 2 3 4 (Kupang City)

BALI & NUSRA

• Water sector (projection of water scarcity period 2020-2034)
• Marine sector (projection of wave height for vessels <10GT period 2006-2045 
• Coastal Sector (coastal vulnerability in 2018)
• Health Sector (projection of dengue fever cases period 2020-2034)

Remarks 


12 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Change is coming, 
whether you like it or not. 
- Greta Thunberg

For developing countries, especially 
Indonesia, climate change adaptation 
is no longer an option, but a priority 
for sustainable development. 
Therefore, the involvement of all 
stakeholders must be inclusive and 
efficient.
As a national strategic plan, RAN API 
has four priority sectors for climate 
change adaptation, i.e. the marine 
and coastal, water, agriculture, 
and health. In the implementation 
of climate resilience development 
of those priority sectors, there 
are 4 (four) clusters of adaptation 

strategies (infrastructure, technology, 
capacity building, and governance). 
The clusters need to consider 
(embedded) gender sensitivity and 
vulnerable groups, ecosystem-
based, landscape-based or spatial, 
as well as financial innovation.
RAN API identifies priority 
adaptation programs and provides 
a policy mechanism that can be 
modified to become more climate-
resilient. RAN API also provides 
location priority directions for climate 
change adaptation actions. Based 
on the analysis of the Vulnerability 

Index Data System Information 
(SIDIK) there are 98% of regions 
(villages) with moderate-high 
vulnerability (KLHK, 2019).
Sharing information between 
stakeholders is the most 
important part of this process. 
Thus, adaptation policies and 
programs that have been planned 
for a certain period and how they 
are implemented will be compiled 
and communicated sustainably 
among stakeholders. Then, all 
adaptation action plans will often 
be reviewed and updated.

RAN API: Approach in 
Development Planning

What We Have?

“

“


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 13

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Capacity Building

Technology

Infrastructure

Governance

RAN-API

FRAMEWORK 
OF RAN API

GOAL
Climate-resilient development 
within the sustainable 
development framework
OBJECTIVE
Climate risk management 
in four priority sectors and 
affected areas
CONSIDERATION
Gender sensitivity and 
vulnerable groups, ecosystems, 
landscapes, financial innovation

Policy Direction and Strategy of National Action Plans for Climate Change Adaptation

In addition, RAN API documents 
should cover monitoring and 
evaluation mechanisms, in 
which the results could become 
feedback to ongoing processes 
and used in updating the RAN API 
or other related plans periodically. 
RAN API is part of Indonesia’s 
national development planning 
framework.

In terms of national 
development planning, RAN 
API roles as a specific cross-
sectoral plan for climate-
resilient development. Thus, the 
purpose of priority activities in 
RAN API is to strengthen the 
strategic plan of each institution 
in climate change adaptation.

At national level, RAN API roles as a 
guideline or reference that provide 
direction on future Government Work 
Plans in order to be responsive to 
climate change impacts. At regional 
level, RAN API roles as a reference 
for local governments in preparing 
the Regional Action Plan / Strategy 
and to deal with climate change.


14 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Monitoring 
& Evaluation 
Mechanism 

Evaluation is a key measurement 
instrument that shows the process 
of implementing climate change 
adaptation. Evaluation in climate 
change adaptation is carried out 
annually by monitoring (on going), 
in the middle term, and at the end 
of period of development planning 
document (ex post). The final 
evaluation result of the adaptation 
process is very important for the 
country in order to know how far the 
potential economic losses reduction 
of climate change can be achieved. 
Climate change adaptation 
programs and activities will be 
monitored and evaluated through 
climate budget tagging system, both 
from state budget resources (Fiscal 
Policy Agency/Ministry of Finance) 
and National Climate Change 
Registry System of Ministry of 
Environmental and Forestry (MoEF).
Climate Budget Tagging 
The climate budget tagging 
from the state budget resources 
aims to monitor and evaluate 
the state budget allocation and 
the effectiveness of activities. 
It should be done as a form of 
transparency and accountability of 
climate activities to the community. 
All parties who involved in the 
climate budget tagging, are the 
government institutions with state 
budget resources. Each government 
institution should tag all climate 
programs, activities, and outputs 
into the Ministry of Finance website. 
Currently, the ministry of finance 

is developing the climate budget 
tagging system for local government 
budget of climate change activities. 
Thus, all local governments can 
tag climate change programs and 
activities on the Ministry of Finance 
website, directly.
National Climate Change 
Registry System (SRN) 
National Climate Change Registry 
System involves all stakeholders, 
such as government institution, local 
government, research institution, 
NGO, development partner, 
university, philanthropy, private 
sector, indigenous group, and other 
community groups. SRN was ratified 
through Minister of Environment and 
Forestry (MoEF) Regulation Number 
72 of 2017. SRN can be accessed 
through the website of the Ministry 
of Environment and Forestry.
Components registered in the 
SRN, include: (1) climate change 
adaptation policies; (2) scientific 
studies; (3) climate change 
adaptation planning; (4) activity 
implementations; (5) monitoring and 
evaluation; and (6) capacity building. 
Meanwhile, the scope of monitoring 
and evaluation of RAN API (NAPs) 
from the SRN list, includes: (1) the 
suitability of the choice of activities 
with the level of vulnerability; 
(2) time period for achieving the 
target of adaptation activities; (3) 
the achievement of objectives by 
comparison of planning indicators/ 
targets.

Unless strategy 
evaluation is 
performed 
seriously and 
systematically, and 
unless strategists 
are willing to act 
on the results, 
energy will be 
used up defending 
yesterday.
-Peter Drucker

“

“


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 15

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

The implementation of RAN API (NAPs) 
refers to logical framework, as follows:

Decreasing Potential 
Economic Loss of 
Climate Change Impact

Maintained water supply 
in dry area

Maintained crop production 
in affected area

Protected vulnerable 
coastal area

Reduced ocean hazards 
for small fishing vessels 
(<20 GT)

Reduced the risk of 
DHF outbreak

Amount of raw water 

crop productivity

Length of protected 
coastal area

Higher capacity of 
fishermen on information 
technology

Higher awareness of health 
institutions & the community 
on DHF outbreaks

Adding water infiltration 
in potentially dry area

Development of climate 
resistant plant varieties

Construction of protective 
hybrid structures in high 
vulnerability coastal area

Provision of extreme weather 
information & potential fish 
distribution that is easily accessed 
by fisherman with <20 GT vessel

Development of climate-
based early warning 
information system for DHF

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategies 
& Action Framework


16 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

CLUSTERS IN BOX 2
CLIMATE CHANGE 
ADAPTATION 
Climate-resilient 
Infrastructure
In adaptation, infrastructure must have a climate-
resilient, ecosystem-based, and retrofit in order to 
face the challenges and impacts of climate change 
(Davis, 2010; BPIW, 2016; European Commission, 
2018).
Grey infrastructure is a man-made facilities and 
infrastructures using pavement design, such as 
concrete or non-natural structures.
Green infrastructure is a facilities and infrastructure 
built in harmony with the landscape or using 
environmentally-friendly and inexpensive technology 
for maintenance. The infrastructure is built with the 
purpose to develop strong basic local knowledge 
on climate variability and the possibility of climate 
change impacts.
The infrastructure needs to support multi-hazard and 
risk reduction. The infrastructure must consider low-
income people and vulnerable groups, because they 
are the most vulnerable or at risk to climate change.
Infrastructure development must be fully integrated 
with national development plans, SDGs, and poverty 
reduction strategy plans.

Technology as a scientific method for practical 
needs in solving the potential impact of 
climate change on humans and environment. 
Technology can also be utilized for gaining the 
benefits of the positive effects of climate change.
Adaptive technology capable to response the 
potential impacts of climate change and in 
line with development goals, cost-effective, 
environmentally friendly, culturally compatible, 
and socially acceptable (UNFCCC, 2006).

Climate-proof 
Technology

Governance is related to regulation, institution 
and coordination strategies for adaptation efforts 
in development pillars, including governments, 
private sectors, and communities.
Governance requires mechanisms and instruments 
to support the effectiveness of adaptation efforts, 
i.e. policy and operational instruments, such as 
regulations and information systems.
A well-governance is implemented through 
coordination of the development pillars by applying 
the principles of inclusiveness, transparency, easy 
access to information, and accountability.

Climate Change 
Adaptation Governance

Capacity Building on Climate change 
encourages stakeholders to design and 
implement various actions to reduce 
climate change impacts, adapt, 
overcome the loss and damage, 
arrange credible steps to monitor 
climate-related parameters, 
adopt new technologies and 
methods, and raise climate 
change awareness.

Capacity 
Building


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 17

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Adaptation 
Targets
Potential economic losses caused 
by climate change impact can be 
reduced through the well-planned 
and measured climate change 
adaptation actions. On a macro-
scale, the risk of climate change can 
be managed by adjusting policies, 
strategies, and technologies for all 
adaptation options. In climate change 
adaptation efforts, Government of 
Indonesia is committed to protect 
the people and environment against 
the impact of climate change, which 
will simultaneously bring benefits and 
improve people’s livelihoods and as 
well as the ecosystems.

Chart of Potential Economic Losses caused by the Impact of Climate Change

17.13 
17.06 
17.02

24.55 
24.49 
24.43

GDP (thousand trillion Rp)

GDP Projection
GDP with adaptation efforts in RPJMN 2020-2024
GDP with potential economic losses due to climate change

Climate Resilience Target 
in RPJMN 2020-2024

Potential Economic Losses 
caused by Impact of
Climate Change

Climate change is 
the environmental 
challenge of this 
generation, and it is 
imperative that we act 
before it’s too late. 
-John Delaney

“

“


18 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

The planned scenario 
and effort of climate 
change adaptation 
will bring benefits:

Indonesia is able to 
reduce the potential 
for economic losses by  
50.51% 
in 2024

Protect at least
269.2 trillion m3 
of water resource

Avoid as many as 
350,828 cases 
of Dengue Fever due to 
climate change in 2024

Avoid as many as 
43,477
ship accident in all 
categories of ships

Save1,697.8 tons 
of capture fisheries production 
of in 2024

Maintain production 
as much as 
8,406.4 
million tons 
of rice

Protect 
413,209 ha 
of residential areas
in the coastal area

To avoid national GDP loss and economic losses, the policy 
makers should make a numerous efforts not only mitigation, 
but also adaptation. According to economic valuation, 
adaptation efforts can avoid national GDP loss from

(with adaptation actions)5 in 2024.

IDR 24.43 thousand trillion
 (without adaptation actions) to
IDR 24.49 thousand trillion


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 19

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Climate resilience development is an obligation to protect the community 
and other various aspects of development from threats and risks of climate 
change. This effort brings benefits for the continuity of economic, social and 
environmental life, consider that Indonesia is an agricultural country and has 
second longest coastline in the world. Indonesia intended to achieve the 
ideal climate resilience condition with robust anthropological and ecological 
systems that is resilient to the hazard of climate change.
To take the actions regarding the impacts of climate change, is not only stated 
in the RAN API document, but will need an integrative support from other 
policy and strategy or planning documents to achieve the targets of RAN API.
Participation of various stakeholder namely national and sub-national 
governments, private sectors, development partners and the community is 
critically needed. To ensure the involvement of stakeholder, it will need certain 
policies that can provide incentives for all stakeholders, especially for private 
sectors and individuals to have the willingness to act together towards climate 
resilient economy.
Climate change is sometimes 
misunderstood as being about 
changes in the weather, in reality it is 
about changes in our very way of life. 
-Paul Polman

“

“

Action Plans


20 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Adaptation action in each priority sector involved 
various stakeholders, including national and 
sub-national governments who have the direct 
authority related to priority sectors. To develop 
the adaptation actions, each priority sector has 
specific strategy and delivery strategy. 

Strategy and Delivery Strategy 
of climate change adaptation in

to be conducted in
the period of 2020-2045

4 

PRIORITY 
SECTORS

Marine & Coastal Sector

Agriculture Sector

Water Sector

Health Sector


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 21

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Water Sector
Strategy
Management of water resources to meet the clean water demand 
and to prevent the climate disaster caused by water damage.

Cluster Delivery Strategy Indicative Intervention

Infrastructure

• Consider the area (ha) that are threatened by 
drought and flood.
• Calculate the capacity based on the number of 
households affected, the size of the agricultural 
area, and industry.
• Consider the numbers and locations of 
increasing rainfall intensity.

• Dam construction.
• Retention basin construction.
• Vegetation management at upstream area. 
• Construction and structure adjustment for 
rain harvesting/provision for alternative 
sources of clean water.

Adjustment for technical capacity based on rainfall 
projection.

Urban drainage width adjustment.

Freshwater management in coastal areas by 
adjusting location, dimensions, and quantities 
based on the threat of sea level rise.

Construction and adjustment for infiltration 
well.

Technology

Efforts to redistribute water during heavy rain in 
potentially flooded areas.

Weather modification technology (rain 
reduction).
Filling reservoir to meet fresh water demand. Weather modification technology (rain 
enhancement).
Increases water discharge into the aquifer. Water injection technology.
Distribute water to drought areas in real time. Technology to detect leakage and identify 
water consumption needs

Capacity 
Building

Increased of public awareness (sense of belonging) 
to utilize and manage water sources for supplies 
during drought.

•   Increase public awareness.
•   Increase community capacity through 
training, campaigns, etc.

Governance

Development or revision of adaptive Engineering 
Design/ technical standards/ infrastructure 
operational.

Technical input on the revision of national 
building and operational standards.

Determination of Ground Water Protected Areas 
(KLA) in watershed, to reforest and restrict forest 
utilization inside the KLA /catchment area.

Technical input on the policy set for KLA 
restrictions.

Management of water resources to increase 
the water availability to meet water demand for 
households, agriculture and industry.

Issuance of Norm, Standard, Procedure, and 
Criteria (NSPK) of master plan development 
for a climate change adaptive drinking water 
supply system.

Management of water resources to improve 
environmental quality.

Development of environmental water security.


22 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Agriculture Sector
Strategy
Climate Smart Agriculture to maintain the food production.

Cluster Delivery Strategy Indicative Intervention

Infrastructure

Fulfill the agricultural water requirement in 
agricultural centers area that are prone to 
drought and crop failures.

• Construction of dams, retention basins, 
and detention ponds, which are needed for 
irrigation.
• Construction and maintenance of irrigation 
networks.
• Normalization of rivers, dams and other water 
reservoirs.
• System of piping and shallow well, drip 
irrigation, and sprinkler irrigation.

Improve soil characteristics on dry and critical 
land to better retain water, through water and 
soil conservation.

• Rainwater harvesting to extend planting time in 
drought conditions (integrated small reservoirs).
• Increasing the use of organic fertilizers and 
reducing chemical fertilizers.
• Using cocopeat for seedbed in ex-mining areas 
and critical land.

Technology

Utilize biotechnology in developing superior 
varieties that are climate resistant.WW

• Development of superior varieties of plants that 
are resistant to climate stress and pests.
• Rice varieties that resistant to flood, drought, 
salinity, and pests.
• The use of certain microbes to develop high 
salinity resistant rice varieties.
• High nutritional tubers that resists extreme 
weather.

Strengthen agricultural innovations and 
technologies which consider climate impact 
and supports food security.

• Utilization of technology for precision farming 
and smart farming.
• The use of sensors that are able to identify 
water content and soil chemistry on agricultural 
land (vidiometry/drone/cctv, etc.).
• Modeling the water balance and plant nutrients 
on the land, as well as the development of 
geographic information systems on distribution 
points of nutrition and water shortages.
• Automation of watering and fertilizing tools 
according to land requirements.

Adopt and modify technology to identify plant 
growth, to record water and nutrition use.

Monitoring rice fields (standing crop) using Modis 
and Sentinel-2 images.

Adjust planting time based on seasonal 
predictions to avoid drought.

• Integrated planting calendar information 
system.
• Identify the suitability of seasons and regions 
with the appropriate crop commodities. 
• Climate prediction for agriculture.


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 23

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Strengthen innovation in agriculture to increase 
food production in addition to the main commodity 
(rice) which consider climate effects.

• Development of brackish tilapia that withstands 
high salinity.
• Development of nutritious grass that is resistant to 
climate stress.
• Improved quality of livestock supplements to 
overcome heat stress.
• Development of livestock vaccines to cope with 
heat stress.
• Development of superior livestock genes that are 
resistant to climate stress.

Fulfil irrigation water for agricultural land during dry 
season to increase rice production using modern 
technology.

• Weather modification technology to replenish 
agricultural reservoirs and anticipation of drought 
in the food production central area. 
• Solar water pump.

Capacity 
Building

Improve farmers’ understanding on climate 
information that is useful to determine planting 
time and agricultural practices.

Climate Field School.

Educating the public to utilize innovations and 
agricultural technologies (superior climate resistant 
varieties, precision farming methods, planting 
calendars, and agricultural information systems).

Assistance and facilitation to farmer groups and 
association of farmer groups.

Enhance the understanding of agricultural 
businesses related to climate smart agriculture 
strategies.

Assistance and facilitation to agricultural companies.

Improve institutional capabilities and agricultural 
human resources.

Training of officers and members of agricultural 
institutions (vocational) related to agricultural climate 
information systems, database management, and 
implementation of precision farming methods.

Governance

Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of water 
and nutrition use to increase crop productivity, 
cost efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions.

• Application of precision farming methods on 
strategic agricultural lands.
• Application of intermittent irrigation in rice fields.
• Utilization of agricultural wastes (livestock manure 
for plants).
• Integration of several types of plants in one 
agricultural land.

Develop integrated agriculture database as part of 
the Climate Smart Agriculture strategy.

• Mapping the location and characteristics of 
agricultural land development (both negatively and 
positively affected by climate change)
• Mapping of data and information resources.
• Strengthening coordination between institutions in 
the agricultural sector.

Provide alternative financing for agricultural land 
when climate failure occurs.

• Climate-based agricultural insurance.
• Encourage leveraging finance and manufacture of 
agricultural investment products.

Strengthening the distribution and agriculture 
market in accordance with the climate smart 
agriculture strategy.

• Review and strengthen the regulations related to 
agricultural business chains.
• Create new agricultural markets (trading 
agricultural innovations between researchers 
and companies, as well as other agricultural 
entrepreneurs).
• Cooperation with telecommunications providers. 
• Strengthening of village-owned company 
(BUMDes), and small and medium enterprises in 
the agricultural sector.
• Application of operating standards (ISO) that 
consider climate and environment.


24 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Marine & Coastal Sector
Strategy
Coastal Area Protection and Maritime Safety.
Cluster Delivery Strategy Indicative Intervention

Infrastructure

• Infrastructure that takes into account the 
characteristics of coastal morphology in 
areas that have high vulnerability to the 
effects of climate change.
• Combine Ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) 
and community-based adaptation (CbA) 
approaches.
• Risk reduction for abrasion in coastal areas.

• Construction of the beach belt (geotextile bags/KGM). 
• Construction of hard structures: beach belts, hybrid 
structures, concrete structures.
• Construction of soft structures (mangrove planting and/
or coastal vegetation)/greenbelt.
• composite flood gates; automatic floodgates to drain 
water in urban flood channels (coastal areas) by 
utilizing the water level difference in flood channels.

Technology

The application of marine survey technology that 
is able to detect fish stocks, avoids the potential 
decline in fishing catches of fishermen due to 
climate change.

ROV (Remotely Operated Vehicle) marine survey 
technology.

Technology with capability to detect extreme 
waves to reduce the number of ship accidents.

Application of AIS (Automatic Identification System) 
technology; automatic tracking on ships and ship traffic 
shipping (VTS).

Adaptation to shoreline changes due to the 
effects of climate change; innovative design of 
coastal dynamics monitoring systems in areas 
that require spatial planning that consider the 
danger of sea level rise and extreme weather.

Application of phyto-sandbar artificial technology.

Increase the certainty of fishing time and reduce 
fisherman sailing hazards due to extreme waves.

Innovations of small fishing boat design that are adaptive 
and made with fiberglass.

Capacity 
Building

Assistance to fishermen in the application of 
<10GT fishing boat standardization.

ToT fishing boat manufacturing with fiberglass raw 
material (design, selection of material until it is ready to 
sail).

Provide alternative livelihoods for small 
fishermen who cannot go to sea due to extreme 
waves.

• Strengthening the capacity of cooperative and fishing 
group.
• Fisherman insurance (Weather index insurance).

Increase human resource capacity for disaster 
response in coastal areas.

Assistance to fishermen groups, communities and local 
governments.

The participation of coastal community groups 
to apply the concept of ecosystem-based 
adaptation.

Community based coastal ecosystem management.

Governance

Increase capacity and information access 
for small fishermen in reading marine climate 
information.

• Provide fisheries information that is easily accessible. 
• Early warning system.
• Education, counseling & public awareness.

Provision of regulatory instrument and 
information related to high wave hazards, type 
and capacity of fishing boats.

• Technical input on climate hazards for disaster-related 
regulations in coastal regions and small islands. 
• Technical input related to climate hazards for the 
regulation of sea space & coastal areas.
• Disaster risk map in coastal areas.
• Fishing management regulations in restricted area or 
marine protected areas.


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 25

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Health Sector
Strategy
Protect the Community and Environmental Health.
Cluster Delivery Strategy Indicative Intervention

Infrastructure

Build appropriate infrastructure in high 
vulnerability location of DHF.

Houses and buildings that comply with building health 
standards.

Consider the potential DHF outbreak location 
while calculating capacity of health facilities.

Increase capacity of health facilities.

Increase Environmental health based on the 
characteristics of endemic area.

• Implementation of Community Based Sanitation (STBM). 
• Clean water and minimum livelihood provision. 
• Fogging (dengue vector extermination).
• Addition of green open space (RTH).

Technology

Availability of DHF Outbreak information and 
early warning system.

• Development of DBD-Klim early warning & information 
system to prevent outbreak (daily reporting system). 
• Data and information completion.

Model the potential vector-borne disease 
occurrence (infection number and period).

Health Biomonitoring of climate change diseases.

Capacity 
Building

Increase community understanding, especially 
vulnerable groups toward climate change 
diseases.

• Early education about the effects of climate change. 
• Addition of public health and climate curriculum in 
lower education level (natural science}
• Increasing climate risk knowledge for health facilitator 
and jumantik (wiggler surveillance)
• Dissemination and rising awareness of prevention and 
diseases control in potentially endemic area.

Governance

Law and program revitalization of prevention and 
transmission control based on projected DHF 
outbreak indication.

• Revised diseases prevention guidance. 
• Field checking of diseases prevention program. 
• Healthy building standardization adjustment.

Maximize the community based adaptation in 
preventing/ response to DHF outbreak.

Simple technology use (DBD cap) to prevent dengue 
vector propagation and provide clean water.

Household Based Adaptation (active 
involvement of communities to reduce 
vulnerability in household scale).

Health sector climate change adaptation in household level: 
• Woman in family welfare (household & neighborhood). 
• local youth community.
• other Village level communities.


26 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

Coordination & Resource 
Mobilization Mechanism
RAN API document is a long-term 
planning document to support 
the achievement of Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) in 2030 
and Indonesia Vision 2045. RAN 
API implementation considers and 
synergy on the process with other 
strategic policy documents, i.e. SDGs, 
disaster risk reduction, spatial plan, 
and low carbon development, which 
have direct and indirect benefits 
to strengthen the climate change 
adaptation action.
An inclusive and iterative approach is 
applied in the preparation of RAN API 
by understanding the characteristics 
of the affected sectors through 
experience and best practices at local 
level.
The financing mechanism for climate 
change adaptation is not only from 
state budget (APBN and APBD), but 
also from international mechanisms, 
both bilateral and multilateral, private 
investment and Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR). International 
fund resources are available for 
governments, private sectors, 
and communities. The adaptation 
efforts need to be mainstreamed in 
all affected development sectors. 
Proactive government (national and 
local) and other stakeholders (private 
sectors, development partners, and 
communities) is important to support 
the efforts.. As stated in the Article 
12 of Paris Agreement, “Parties 
shall cooperate in taking measures, 
as appropriate, to enhance climate 
change education, training, public 
awareness, public participation 
and public access to information, 
recognizing the importance of these 
steps with respect to enhancing 
actions under this Agreement”.

STAKEHOLDER INTEREST AND ROLE

Ministry/Institution

• Contribute in international agreements and 
participate in international negotiation for 
regional/local program.
• Implement policy, program, and sectoral plans. 
• Improve human resource development in 
national level.
• Develop capacity and effective mechanism to 
solves sectoral isues in national level. 
• Reduce national climate risks.

Local Governments

• Solves local issues.
• Improve local capacity.
• Finance local plans and program.
• Strengthen local institutions.
• Prevent local climate hazard and damage.

Research Institute/ 
Higher Education

• Contribute to solves climate change issues in 
human system and vulnerable ecosystem in 
national and sub-national level. 
• Improve national and local capacity to cope with 
climate change.
• Develop national and local approach in 
coping climate change by developing proper 
perspectives.

Non-Government 
Organization/NGO

• Facilitate local community organization and 
identify actions for local needs.
• Finance local program and development 
projects.
• Improve capacity (example: facility, finance, 
human, institution).
• Strengthen local institutions.

Local Community

• Improve or maintain health, education, and 
settlement.
• Increase or sustain the water and soil 
productivity.
• Decrease the local vulnerability to climate risk.
• Increase or maintain adaptive capacity to cope 
with climate risk.


National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019 27

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)


28 National Adaptation Plan Executive Summary 2019

Ministry of National Development Planning/National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas)

1Potential reduction in GDP per capita in 2020 is 2.29% 
and in 2024 is 4.33% (Burke & Hsiang, 2015).
2The analysis results of the evaluation index information 
system data evaluation (SIDIK) - Ministry of Environment 
and Forestry 2019
3Climate budget tagging mechanism (fiscal policy Agency – 
Ministry of finance, 2018)
4National Climate Change Registry System (Ministry of 
Environment and Forestry, 2016)
5Result of Economic Loss Assessment Impact on Climate 
Change for RPJMN 2020-2024.
Benefits of adaptation actions are calculated based on 
adaptation efforts planned by the Government in 4 priority 
sectors in the draft RPJMN 2020-2024.
The assessment of economic losses combines projections 
of potential hazards with trend changes in economic 
parameters, which consist of:
GDP projections use the simulation results of GDP/ 
capita growth on September 2019, from the RPJMN 
2020-2024 Macro Economy Framework date December 
3th, 2019.
The projected population based on the 2015 SUPAS 
results, with a population growth scenario from the 
Ministry of National Development Planning/ National 
Development Planning Agency.
IDR 14,000/USD exchange rate.

Economic loss assessment combines the projected 
potential hazard with a trend of changing economic 
parameters, which consists of
Sectors and Hazards:
Water: Decrease water availability for agricultural, 
household and industrial.
Marine and Coastal: Disturbance of sea transportation 
and fisheries production; inundation of coastal 
settlements.
Agriculture: Decrease in rice production.
Health: Increase in Dengue Fever outbreaks.
Parameters of Economic Loss calculation:
Water: Reduced water discharge, in which the amount 
is valued by rice production (m3/ton water demand) and 
price/m3 of water for settlements and industry.
Marine and Coastal: Disturbance of sea transportation 
safety and fisheries production is valued from (1) the 
potential loss of fish captured, (2) the economic loss 
from damaged ship, and (3) the lost vessel crew's 
income; Losses from inundation on coastal settlements 
are calculated based on the settlements that are 
potentially inundated and their property values. 
Agriculture: The price per tons of rice predicted to lost 
due to climate change.
Health: Medical expenses for Dengue Fever sufferers; 
DALY costs (health care costs for mortally dengue 
cases).

Final Notes


Supported by

RAN API Secretariat
Lippo Kuningan Building, 15th floor, Jl. H.R. Rasuna Said Kav. B-12 
Jakarta 12940, Indonesia, +62 21 8067 9319

NATIONAL 
ADAPTATION 
PLAN 
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY